Leading Wintech
Frequently Asked Questions
--------------------------

This file covers frequently asked questions about Waterfall and Rain.

Q: How do Rain and Waterfall work?
A: They're both small programs that issue HLT commands to idle parts 
of the CPU, so that they don't generate heat while they're idle.

Q: What's a HLT command?
A: It's a command that puts a certain part of the CPU into suspend mode.
In advanced CPUs, this command can be executed while parts of the CPU are
idle so that they can save power and stay cool. 

Q: What's the difference between Rain and Waterfall?
A: Rain is the most efficient CPU cooling software there is. With Rain,
you can expect your temperature decrease to be greater than with Waterfall.
Waterfall however is more secure (that doesn't mean that Rain is buggy or
will crash all the time, but Waterfall is more difficult to crash). Waterfall
also has some additional features such as CPU busy state checking and a CPU
monitor, which are not avalible in Rain. 

Q: Okay, okay, I get the picture... but which one should I choose?
A: That depends on your needs. If you don't need a CPU monitor, then we 
recommend you to try Rain first. If Rain crashes under your system (don't worry,
the fact that Waterfall is safer doesn't mean that Rain is unstable), then
we recommend you to try Waterfall instead.

Q: How do Rain and Waterfall compare to other cooling softwares, such as CPUIdle?
A: To help you understand the difference between Rain, Waterfall and CPUIdle,
we created this small comparisson chart.

			Rain		Waterfall	CPUIdle		CPUIdle -loadonly
System  Performance	Excellent	Excellent	Good		Excellent
Cooling Performance	Excellent	Very Good	Very Good	Fair
Secure  Performance	Very good	Excellent	Fair    	Poor
Memory requirement	300K		300KB		1.6MB		100KB
CPU Monitor		No		Yes		No		No

Note: CPUIdle -loadonly may require an additional optimizer in order to work 
properly with some CPUs. Rain, Waterfall and CPUIdle (without -loadonly) don't need 
any additional software to work properly.

Q: Sometimes the background in Waterfall's traybar icon becomes all red (but the icon
itself remains blue), what does that mean?
A: It means that your CPU is 100% busy - it doesn't mean that Waterfall is disabled 
though 

Q: Does using Waterfall and/or Rain decrease my overall performance?
A: Well... the task that Waterfall & Rain both execute doesn't decrease your overall
performance. However, no matter how small they are, Waterfall & Rain are programs, and
just like any other program, while they're running, they do use some resources. However,
the amount of resources that they use is negligible, so the impact on performance is 
almost null.

Q: I've tried several fake performance boosters, wow do I know that Waterfall or Rain 
really work?
A: The only way to notice that they are really working is to measure your CPU and/or
heatsink temperature. But, believe me, it works.

Q: I hear some buzzing sound coming out of my speakers when using Rain or Waterfall, 
is something wrong?
A: That's a very common problem. This is not a bug in either Rain or Waterfall, it's just
that some hardware components have weird behaviors when a HLT instruction is executed. This
buzzing sound seems to be the most usual problem - although some people think it's annoying,
it's actually harmless.

Q: I experience some weird side effects when running Waterfall or Rain. What should I do?
A: The best thing to do is to try to identify if the problem is with the program itself or
the HLT instruction. The only way to do that would be to install CPUIdle (another cooling 
program) and see if it works. If it doesn't, then contact your hardware manufacturers 
(especially your motherboard manufacturer) and ask them about any conflicts with the HLT 
instruction. Notice that if there is a conflict with HLT instructions, then this is not 
Waterfall or Rain's fault, in fact, the problem will be reproduced under any OS that uses
HLT instructions (such as Windows NT for example).

If you run CPUIdle and the problem disappears, then please contact the author of Waterfall
and report this bug, along with a description of your hardware & of any softwares that you
might have running on background.

Another good way of getting help is to access Leading Wintech's message board. However, before
you do that, we strongly recommend you to check if there's any hardware conflict with the HLT 
instructions- because if there is one, then there's very little we can do to help.

Q: Do Rain and Waterfall work under Windows NT?
A: No. Windows NT doesn't need CPU cooling programs that execute HLT instructions, such as 
Rain, Waterfall and CPUIdle, because it already comes with an option to execute HLT 
instructions when the CPU is idle.

Q: Why is it that System Monitor and other CPU monitors indicate that my CPU is 100% busy
when running Rain or Waterfall?
A: That happens because these monitors only detect that a certain percentage of the CPU isn't
being used when it's idle. Both Rain and Waterfall replace this idle mode with a suspend mode
generated by the HLT instructions. Therefore, these monitors will always show that your CPU
is 100% busy. There's no fix for this unless someone releases a patch for these monitors.

Q: When running Rain or Waterfall, I get weird scores under Wintune. Why is that?
A: Wintune isn't a good utility for measuring your system's performance, it's results can't
really be trusted. If you run a Cyrix 6x86MX PR200 at 166Mhz and an Intel Pentium MMX at
166Mhz, it'll show exactly the same scores, but we know that the Cyrix CPU is much faster
(when comparing Mhz per Mhz). Try using Winbench for a real performance benchmark.

Q: Can I use Rain, Waterfall and CPUIdle at the same time for a better cooling?
A: All of these programs do basically the same thing, so only one of them will work if you
run all of them together. 



Copyright (c) 1998, Leading Wintech  