DOSWZCFG - MS-DOS Mode Configuration Wizard Customization Tool

The fact that you're running doswzcfg in the first place demonstrates that you
are a hard-core super power user who believes that fancy GUI help files are
for namby pamby mouse-addicted beginners who think you need exact change to
get onto a PCI bus.  Plain ASCII text files, that's what real hackers user
for documentation.

So here it is.

DOSWZCFG
--------

This program lets you customize the MS-DOS mode configuration wizard.  The
wizard appears when you right-click an MS-DOS application (or shortcut to same),
go to the "Program" page, click "Advanced", then click the "Configure" button.

Option
------

This is a list of MS-DOS mode options that are currently available.  You
can add new options by clicking the "New" button, or remove an option
by clicking the "Remove" button.  However, some options cannot be removed
because they are used internally by the MS-DOS Mode Configuration Wizard.

The next best thing to removing an internal option is to disable it by deleting all the lines from the config.sys and autoexec.bat sections.  (If both the
config.sys and autoexec.bat sections are blank, then the option will not be
shown to the user.)

Text
----

This is the description that appears in the list of configurable options.
If the text section is left blank, then the option is installed unconditionally
without being shown to the user.

Sequence
--------

The MS-DOS Mode Configuration Wizard sorts all the options numerically by their
sequence number.  Options with lower sequence numbers are processed before
options with higher sequence numbers.

Tip
---

This is the "tip" that appears when you select the option.

Install by default
------------------

If this option is selected, then then the item is initialled checked in the
list of configurable options.

This check-box is disabled if the Text is empty, indicating that the option
is mandatory, in which case the option will be installed unconditionally.

Is a memory manager
-------------------

Check this option if the lines in config.sys or autoexec.bat install an
MS-DOS memory manager such as EMM386, QEMM, or 386Max.  Windows needs to know
this information because some programs cannot run if memory managers are
installed, in which case the option will be automatically removed from the
config.sys and autoexec.bat files when those types of programs are run.

Config.sys
----------

Lines entered into this section will be added to the config.sys file.  At
most ten lines can be added.

Autoexec.bat
------------

Lines entered into this section will be added to the autoexec.bat file.  At
most ten lines can be added.

OK
--

Pushing this button saves all changes and exits the program.

Before the changes are applied, you will be given the opportunity to save
the old settings.  If you elect to do so, the old settings are saved in REGEDIT
format so that you can restore them later, should your changes prove not
to have been the best idea.

If you press Cancel when asked to save the old settings, then the old settings
are not saved before the new settings are applied.

Cancel
------

Pushing this button or pressing the ESC key discards all changes and exits
the program.
