
                            Drive Letter Manipulator



  This software has been designed to list drive letter assignments to physical
disk drives and hard disk partitions and to manipulate these assignments.  Its
main purpose is to restore drive letters  when  they  get  shifted  after  the
installation of other hard disks, e.g. ones in  hard  disk  racks.  The  drive
letter changes, when made early enough upon the startup of DOS mode, are  also
visible in Windows 95/98/ME.

  WARNING: It is important that all your DOS drives must have non-empty unique
volume labels for this software to operate correctly!

  NOTE: In this documentation, Windows  means  Windows  95/98/ME.  In  Windows
NT/2000/XP, you can use the Disk Administrator, Disk Management or  a  similar
utility of the Control Panel to assign drive letters anyway so  this  software
is not needed.

  CREDIT: Some ideas, data consistency  checks  and  error  messages  in  this
software have been taken from the reverse  engineering  of  DrvOrder  ((C)  by
unknown, 2000).



  1. Usage

  Before using the software for the first  time,  see  the  next  section  for
important notes!

  The software comes in two flavors. You can use the executable version,  with
COM extension, of the software from the command line or AUTOEXEC.BAT:

  DLMANIP [-|/<options>] <command> [<parameters>...]

  Alternatively, you can use the driver  version,  with  SYS  extension,  from
CONFIG.SYS:

  DEVICE=<path>\DLMANIP.SYS [-|/<options>] <command> [<parameters...>]

  If parameters contain spaces, enclose them into quotation  marks.  In  drive
letters, you may append the colon, if you like.

  If you install device drivers, from drives whose letter needs to be changed,
in CONFIG.SYS then load the driver version of  the  software  from  CONFIG.SYS
beforehands. Note that you have to  specify  the  full  name  of  the  driver,
including its path: at that  point,  the  PATH  environment  variable  is  not
defined yet so DOS cannot find the file automatically.

  Note that the driver is not a real device driver: it does not install itself
anywhere and it returns all the memory to DOS when it has finished  processing
the command specified.

  Commands:

  - LIST

    Lists the current drive letter assignments:

    <drive letter>Tab<partition name>Tab<volume label>Tab<serial number>

    The partition name follows a Linux-style naming convention (see below).

    The syntax for <serial number>  is  "####-####"  where  "#"  represents  a
    hexadecimal digit.

  - SET <letter> <partition name> <volume label> <serial number>

    Moves the drive, that is situated on the specified partition and  has  the
    specified volume label and serial number, to <letter>. The letter  of  the
    original drive <letter> becomes undefined and is  later  replaced  by  the
    first available letter.

    The partition name follows a Linux-style naming convention (see below).

    The syntax for <serial number>  is  "####-####"  where  "#"  represents  a
    hexadecimal digit.

    Special values for <letter> are:

    -: Delete the drive letter. The drive will not be available anymore.

    *: Auto assign the drive letter. The drive  will  be  assigned  the  first
       available letter.

    A special value for <partition name>, <volume label> and  <serial  number>
    is "*" which matches any partition, volume label or serial number: e.g. if
    you want to search for a volume label  only,  specify  "*"  for  both  the
    partition name and the serial number.

    To see the current settings of all drives, use the "LIST" command.

  - MOVE <source letter> <destination letter>

    Moves the drive <source letter> to <destination letter>. The letter of the
    original  drive  <destination  letter>  becomes  undefined  and  is  later
    replaced by the first available letter.

  - DELETE <letter>

    Deletes the drive <letter>. The drive will not be  available  anymore  and
    its letter may be reused for other drives.

  - SWAP <letter #1> <letter #2>

    Swaps the letters of two drives, <letter #1> and <letter #2>.

  - REASSIGN <number of main hard disks>

    Reassigns letters, using the original DOS algorithm, to all drives.

    You have to specify the number of hard disks to  which  letters  from  the
    beginning of the alphabet are to be assigned. When all the  partitions  of
    this many hard disks got a letter, then and only then  does  the  software
    advance to subsequent hard disks and assigns letters to their  partitions,
    as well.

  Options:

  - Q: Makes the software operate quietly. Beware,  in  this  mode,  not  even
    error messages are displayed!

  The original DOS algorithm starts the assignment  of  hard  disk  partitions
with the drive letter C:, independently of the number of  floppy  disk  drives
installed. It processes only those partitions whose type it recognizes  -  for
DOS 3.x and above versions: FAT12 and FAT16; for DOS 7.x versions  in  Windows
95 OSR2 and Windows 98: FAT32, as well - and skips  partitions  of  all  other
types - including but not limited to HPFS/NTFS, Linux native, Linux swap  etc.
Its main steps are the following:

  1. Process the first primary partition of all hard disks.

     Start at first hard disk and see if it has a primary  partition.  If  so,
     assign a drive letter to the first such primary partition (the  one  with
     the lowest partition number).

     Do the same with the next hard disk and continue until reaching the  last
     hard disk.

  2. Process all logical partitions of all hard disks.

     Start at first hard disk and see if it has an extended partition.  (There
     may be one only extended partition, if any, on each hard  disk).  If  so,
     traverse through it and assign subsequent drive letters to  each  logical
     drive, in the order that they are defined in the extended partition.

     Do the same with the next hard disk and continue until reaching the  last
     hard disk.

  3. Process further primary partitions of all hard disks.

     Start at first hard disk  and  see  if  it  has  more  than  one  primary
     partition. If so, assign a drive letter to them, in the  order  of  their
     definition in the Master Boot Record. Make sure to skip the first primary
     partition as a drive letter has already been assigned to it in step 1.

     Do the same with the next hard disk and continue until reaching the  last
     hard disk.

  Linux uses a significantly simpler algorithm. All  partitions  on  all  hard
disks are processed, even if their type is not recognized. Its main steps  are
the following.

  1. The two floppy disk drives are named "fd0" (usually A: under DOS/Windows)
     and "fd1" (usually B:). If more floppy disk drives  are  installed,  they
     get subsequent numbers after the "fd" prefix.

  2. IDE hard disks are named "hda", "hdb", "hdc" etc. Note that, unlike  with
     DOS/Windows, these names do not change if other hard disks installed. The
     master hard disk on the primary IDE channel is always "hda"; the  primary
     slave is always "hdb"; the secondary master is "hdc"; the secondary slave
     is "hdd" etc.

     SCSI hard disks are names "sda", "sdb", "sdc" etc., in a similar manner.

  3. Primary and extended partitions, those defined in the Master Boot Record,
     are numbered from 1 to 4, thus are named "XdY1" to "XdY4" where "XdY"  is
     the name assigned to their parent hard disk  in  step  2.  (Yes, extended
     partitions also have a name, although they cannot be used to store data.)

  4. If an extended partition exists, its logical drives are numbered  from  5
     upwards, in the order they were defined in the extended partition.

  This software uses a similar algorithm for assigning  names  to  partitions.
The "LIST" command includes these partition names in its output:

  1. The first device that the BIOS recognizes as an IDE hard disk, SCSI  hard
     disk or equivalent is named "hda"; the second is named "hdb" etc.

     This device may also be an IDE/SCSI CD-ROM or DVD-ROM or  a  USB/Firewire
     hard disk, CD-ROM, DVD-ROM, flash drive or pen drive etc., if  your  BIOS
     supports accessing such devices - and can, perhaps, even boot from them.

     For this reason, unlike under Linux, "hda" is not necessarily the  master
     hard disk on the primary IDE channel. Also, holes between IDE devices are
     not taken into account by the BIOS: e.g if the primary master is present,
     the primary slave is missing, and the secondary master  is  present  then
     the secondary master will be named "hdb", not "hdc" as Linux  would  name
     it. This is a limitation of the BIOS, not this software.

  2. Partitions are numbered the same way as under Linux (see above).

  An example for drive letters shifting after the installation of another hard
disk and the "REASSIGN" command taking care of it. You  have  two  hard  disks
installed all the time, each  have  one  primary  partition  and  two  logical
drives. DOS assigns drive letters as the following:

  C: First hard disk, primary partition
  D: Second hard disk, primary partition
  E: First hard disk, first logical drive
  F: First hard disk, second logical drive
  G: Second hard disk, first logical drive
  H: Second hard disk, second logical drive

  Now install a third hard disk, with one primary partition  and  two  logical
drives on it. The result is:

  C: First hard disk, primary partition
  D: Second hard disk, primary partition
  E: Third hard disk, primary partition
  F: First hard disk, first logical drive
  G: First hard disk, second logical drive
  H: Second hard disk, first logical drive
  I: Second hard disk, second logical drive
  J: Third hard disk, first logical drive
  K: Third hard disk, second logical drive

  As you can see, the logical drives of the two  main  hard  disks  had  their
letters shifted. Now use the "REASSIGN 2" command and you get:

  C: First hard disk, primary partition
  D: Second hard disk, primary partition
  E: First hard disk, first logical drive
  F: First hard disk, second logical drive
  G: Second hard disk, first logical drive
  H: Second hard disk, second logical drive
  I: Third hard disk, primary partition
  J: Third hard disk, first logical drive
  K: Third hard disk, second logical drive

  This is the original drive letter assignment plus letters from  the  end  of
the alphabet have been assigned to the partitions of the third hard disk.  For
a test, try the "REASSIGN 1" command, and you will get:

  C: First hard disk, primary partition
  D: First hard disk, first logical drive
  E: First hard disk, second logical drive
  F: Second hard disk, primary partition
  G: Third hard disk, primary partition
  H: Second hard disk, first logical drive
  I: Second hard disk, second logical drive
  J: Third hard disk, first logical drive
  K: Third hard disk, second logical drive

  Note that the letter D: is not assigned to  the  primary  partition  of  the
second hard disk anymore because you specified that you  have  only  one  main
hard disk.

  Drive letter manipulations also work under the DOS mode of Windows.  If  you
launch Windows afterwards, the new drive letter assignments  will  be  visible
there, too.

  Special note for Windows users! If your operating system is installed onto a
partition whose drive letter has been changed, you may run into one or more of
the following errors while Windows is being loaded:

  - Symptom: Error message "Registry file was not found. Registry services may
    be inoperative for this session." displayed  while  loading.  If  you  let
    Windows continue loading, the result will be  a  disaster:  as  no  system
    configuration can be read from the registry, all  settings  fall  back  to
    default, similarly to safe mode or as if  running  Windows  for  the  very
    first time, right after its installation.

    Reason: DOS mode seems to internally store the drive letter of the  system
    partition, after having finished processing  CONFIG.SYS  so  changing  the
    drive letter in AUTOEXEC.BAT or from the command line  is  too  late.  The
    message means that the registry file has not been loaded because DOS could
    not find it.

    Solution: The drive letters have to be changed in CONFIG.SYS. You have  to
    use the "DEVICE=" command in CONFIG.SYS to load the driver version of  the
    software.

  - Symptom: Error message  "XMS  cache  problem.  Registry  services  may  be
    inoperative for this session." displayed while loading.

    Reason: DOS mode installs HIMEM.SYS, from the system partition,  invisibly
    and automatically, before it starts processing   CONFIG.SYS.  The  message
    means that HIMEM.SYS has not been loaded because DOS could not find it.

    Solution: Load HIMEM.SYS explicitly in CONFIG.SYS, using the correct path.

  - Symptom: Loading aborts, fatal error "[VFAT Device Initialization  Failed]
    A device or resource required by VFAT is not present  or  is  unavailable.
    VFAT cannot continue loading. System halted." displayed on a blue screen.

    Reason: DOS mode installs IFSHLP.SYS, from the system partition, invisibly
    and automatically, before it starts  processing  CONFIG.SYS.  The  message
    means that IFSHLP.SYS has not been loaded because DOS could not find it.

    Solution: Load IFSHLP.SYS explicitly  in  CONFIG.SYS,  using  the  correct
    path.

  If your Windows ran fine before then these problems are, most probably,  all
related to DOS and Windows getting confused about  the  drive  letter  of  the
system partition being different from what it expects.

  A suggested solution for all of the problems above is the following.  First,
copy the driver version of this software into a directory  on  a  drive  whose
letter is never going to change - obviously, the best candidate for this is  a
directory on drive C: -; "C:\WINBOOT" in the example. Also copy HIMEM.SYS  and
IFSHLP.SYS from the Windows directory into this directory.  Then  prepend  the
following lines to your CONFIG.SYS:

  DEVICE=C:\WINBOOT\DLMANIP.SYS /Q <command> <parameters...>
  DEVICE=C:\WINBOOT\HIMEM.SYS
  DEVICE=C:\WINBOOT\IFSHLP.SYS
  [...]

  The first line fixes drive letters. The second and  third  lines  explicitly
install the otherwise invisibly and automatically installed system drivers.

  Use the letter manipulation commands of this software to  change  the  drive
letters, before letting DOS process the rest of  CONFIG.SYS.  Remember,  these
must be the first lines of your CONFIG.SYS!

  If there are some other drivers that you install from the Windows  directory
in CONFIG.SYS then make a copy of  those,  too,  and  change  your  CONFIG.SYS
accordingly. For example, to install country and code page settings:

  [...]
  COUNTRY=<country>,<code page>,C:\WINBOOT\COUNTRY.SYS
  DEVICE=C:\WINBOOT\DISPLAY.SYS CON=(EGA,,1)
  [...]



  2. Important notes

  - The software can only list and manipulate the drive letters of  partitions
    that the underlying BIOS and DOS have already recognized upon booting up.

  - The software refuses to work when a disk cache is present as drive  letter
    changes may make the  cache  read/write  data  from/to  the  wrong  drive.
    Changes are not permitted under Windows either, for similar reasons,  only
    in DOS mode.

  - Make sure to have unique volume labels and serial  numbers  for  all  your
    drives! Not only this software needs that but many others, too!

  - Because the software deals with very delicate matters, make sure  that  it
    is the first software executed upon the boot process. If you use softwares
    that create drives (disk devices) - including but not  limited  to  CD/DVD
    drives, SCSI drives, RAID drives, USB  drives,  Firewire  drives,  network
    drives, RAM disks, compressed drives, SUBST'ed, JOIN'ed, ASSIGN'ed  drives
    - then change the drive letters with this software before loading the disk
    device drivers, otherwise those drivers may get confused.

  - After any change, the "number of block devices installed" value is updated
    in a DOS internal table to the highest  drive  letter  available  at  that
    moment. Otherwise, the directory structure  of  drives,  whose  letter  is
    above this value, may not be completely visible: only the  first  file  or
    directory in the root directory is returned. This is due to an intentional
    internal MS-DOS feature that is assumed to have been implemented to  speed
    up access to disk drives.

    As a result of the update, the "number of block devices  installed"  value
    may be higher than the actual number  of  block  devices,  that  is,  disk
    drives installed and this may confuse some disk device drivers.  Depending
    on the smartness of the disk device  driver,  you  may  or  may  not  have
    problems with installing new drives to (unused) letters that are below the
    highest drive letter but above the "number  of  block  devices  installed"
    value. As a special case, after  having  moved  a  drive  to  the  highest
    possible letter Z:, seeing the "number of block devices  installed"  value
    set to the equivalent of Z:,  some  (not  so  smart)  device  drivers  may
    believe that  there  are  no  more  drive  letters  available  and  refuse
    installation.

  - Copying drive letters, that is, assigning multiple  letters  to  the  same
    drive is not possible as the result would be identical to the  one  above:
    only the first entry of the root directory is visible on the clone drives.
    Instead of this software, use the SUBST or ASSIGN commands of DOS.

  - The DOS mode of Windows has serious problems with handling partitions that
    are very large (usually FAT32 partitions) and/or are beyond some BIOS hard
    disk size limit. As a result, the DOS mode recognizes  the  partition  and
    assigns a letter to it but shows garbage instead of the partition contents
    or returns an error saying that the drive is invalid or unformatted.

    Beware, even if the partition contents seem to be fine,  you  may  destroy
    data in other partitions if you write onto such strange drives! Your  best
    choice is to delete them, with the "DELETE" command of this  software,  so
    that they are not available in DOS mode. When the Windows GUI boots up, it
    will recognize the partitions (again), assign letters to them (again)  and
    handle their contents properly.

  - You will get the "Drive letter beyond LASTDRIVE value" error if you try to
    move a drive to an unavailable letter. E.g. if your LASTDRIVE is set to G,
    you will not be able to use the letters H: to Z: for any drive.

    It is also important to know that while  CONFIG.SYS  is  being  processed,
    the LASTDRIVE value does not change. E.g. if you have altogether five  DOS
    partitions on your hard disks, the device driver version of this  software
    will see a LASTDRIVE  value  of  G.  Unfortunately,  not  even  placing  a
    "LASTDRIVE=Z" line before the call to the device driver helps  with  this:
    the LASTDRIVE value changes  only  after  CONFIG.SYS  has  been  processed
    completely.

    For this reason, you cannot move drives to  letters  at  the  end  of  the
    alphabet from CONFIG.SYS - in the example above, from H: to Z: -, this  is
    possible only from  AUTOEXEC.BAT,  with  the  executable  version  of  the
    software, after having raised the LASTDRIVE value in CONFIG.SYS. This is a
    limitation of DOS, not this software.
    



  3. Error messages

  - Unknown command

    You specified an unknown command.

  - Invalid or missing parameter

    The syntax or the value of the parameter is invalid or too few  parameters
    were specified on the command line.

  - Drive letter beyond LASTDRIVE value

    The drive letter specified on the command line is higher than the  highest
    drive letter currently available. See the important notes above  for  more
    information about the reason for this error.

  - Unsupported DOS version

    You're using a DOS that is not supported. You need MS-DOS  4.0  or  above.
    Also, the software refuses to work under most non-Microsoft DOS clones  as
    their internal data areas may be different from Microsoft DOS'es.

  - Windows running

    You are not allowed to manipulate drive letters when Windows  is  running.
    You should run the software before launching Windows.

  - Cache detected

    You are not allowed to manipulate drive  letters  when  a  disk  cache  is
    installed. You should run the software before installing disk caches. Note
    that only SmartDrive and compatible disk caches are detected.

  - Invalid LASTDRIVE value

    You need to set the "LASTDRIVE" parameter in CONFIG.SYS to a value of  "D"
    or above. Also, a value of above "Z" probably means a damaged system area.

  - Invalid DPB drivenum

    The logical drive number in a drive parameter block is  beyond  "Z".  This
    probably means a non-compatible or damaged system area.

  - CDS drive letter mismatch

    The first character - the drive letter - of the path in an  entry  of  the
    current directory structure is not as  expected.  The  drive  is  probably
    SUBST'ed. You should run the software before doing any other manipulations
    on logical drives.

  - CDS or DPB chain corrupted

    The pointer to the drive parameter block of the same drive differs in  the
    current directory structure and the chain of drive parameter blocks.  This
    probably means a non-compatible or damaged system area.

  - Invalid CDS structure

    The path in an entry  of  the  current  directory  structures  is  neither
    "?:\..." nor "\\...". This probably  means  a  non-compatible  or  damaged
    system area or some unusual disk  device.  You  should  run  the  software
    before installing custom disk devices.



  4. History

  0.10 beta (2003-06-29)

  - First public release.

  0.20 beta (2003-07-01)

  - Fix: Added more updates so that, after the drive letter changes,  the  DOS
         system tables remain consistent.  Without  this,  certain  softwares,
         that access the disk directly, refused to work.

  - Fix: Made the "LIST" and "REASSIGN" commands work  under  MS-DOS  versions
         4.x to 6.x, as well, by getting the pointer to the drive table from a
         DOS service rather reading directly into the DOS system area.

  - New: Created a device driver version of the  software  that  can  be  run,
         before any other software, from CONFIG.SYS.

  - New: Documented the method of changing the drive  letter  of  the  Windows
         system partition so that Windows can load successfully.

  - New: Added the "/q" option to force quiet operation.

  0.30 beta (2004-08-29)

  - Mod: The "LIST" command outputs completely new data: Linux-style partition
         name, volume label and serial number.

  - Mod: Refined the method of changing the drive letter of the Windows system
         partition: it is recommended to copy all  drivers,  that  are  needed
         upon startup, to drive C:.

  - New: Added the "SET", "MOVE" and "DELETE" commands.

  - New: Added important notes.

  - New: Added BOOTREC.PAS, a proof-of-concept program that traverses  through
         all partitions of all hard disks up to the 128 Gigabyte limit,  reads
         the boot sectors of DOS partitions  and  displays  their  Linux-style
         partition name, volume label and serial number.

  0.31 beta (2004-11-07)

  - New: Added an important note about the impossibility of moving any  drive,
         using the device driver version of the software from CONFIG.SYS, to a
         drive letter that is above the highest drive  letter  available  upon
         booting.

  0.32 beta (2004-11-28)

  - New: A new error message "Drive letter beyond LASTDRIVE  value"  has  been
         added.

  - New: BOOTREC.EXE, the executable compiled from BOOTREC.PAS, is included.

  0.33 beta (2005-05-08)

  - Fix: Fixed a problem with detecting the end of DPB chains,  that  resulted
         in an "Invalid DPB drivenum" error in some cases.



  5. To do

  The following changes are planned for the next release:

  - Support for reading commands from a  text  file  so  that  multiple  drive
    letters can be changed via a single call.

  - New command for writing the current drive  letter  assignments,  as  "SET"
    commands, into a text file that  can  later  be  used  for  restoring  the
    assignments, without any manual editing.

  - Wildcards and intervals for the "SET"  command  so  that  the  letters  of
    multiple drives, with similar volume labels and/or serial numbers, can  be
    changed in a single command.



  6. Copyright and legal issues

  This software is freeware. You may use it as long as you wish  and  you  may
spread it as you like provided that it is in the original unmodified  archive.
Don't distribute single files, only the whole package, and don't ask for money
above the normal fee of the distribution media itself. This software  may  not
be included in any compilation, sold on disk or  CD/DVD-ROM  or  bundled  with
software or hardware without prior permission from the author.

  The source of this software is public domain and provided here "as is"  -  I
don't feel like commenting it more but if you have problems then feel free  to
ask me. If you derive your own software from the source or put a part  of  the
source into your own software, please, give me a credit and send a copy to me.

  The author accepts no liability for any damage or data loss caused  by  this
software.



  7. The author

  If you're interested in some similarly useful utilities then contact  me  at
the E-mail address sta@c64.org or visit my homepage at http://sta.c64.org.

  Joe Forster/STA
  8th May, 2005
